Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
What is death?
How will my own life end?
What options do I have.
if any. as to
what my death will be like?
Artists. philosophers.
writers. people like you
and me have been considering
questions like these for. well.
for as long as there
have been human beings.
Today. some of us are willing to
speak openly about such things.
but many of us are not.
We live in a.
in a culture that seems
to hide from mortality.
This is the
most difficult experience for
a patient.
and their families.
Speaking
about death and dying is
complicated for people.
And it takes a certain amount
of willingness to be vulnerable.
These conversations
are not actually about dying.
They're about the
quality of our lives.
Everybody's ideal is
to die quickly in their sleep
and not have any
existential suffering.
But that's not
available to many of us.
25% of people who
die with chronic illness.
die with uncontrolled pain.
I'm going
to die of breast cancer. right.
One of the scariest
things about that is.
is that you have no control.
But you can
control the end of life.
How I die.
I can control how I die.
Medical aid in dying is a
medical treatment that enables
a person who is dying. who
has exhausted all hope for cure
and is close to
an imminent death;
help them die in comfort.
in peace and with
reduced level of suffering.
When somebody
is thinking about aid in dying.
they're not
thinking about it casually.
I think this is
a very difficult debate for
a lot of people.
Some people don't
feel it's an appropriate thing
for a doctor to do.
I don't know
whether I would use it.
but I know I'd
like to have the choice.
This is between
an individual and her family
and doctor.
A good
conversation goes...
A long way.
Right.
but it's a hard one.
Most people would
rather not talk about death.
They'd rather push
it out of their minds.
But I believe we
must talk about it.
For me. thinking about
what I would like to have at
the end of my life
is very important.
And sharing my wishes
with my family. my friends.
my physician. I believe
will bring comfort to us all
when my time comes.
I want to tell
you about John Rehm.
my husband of 54 years.
He was a fine man.
self-confident.
with a wonderful mind.
He was knowledgeable
about so many things and John
was a born teacher.
She hadn't been
to college and she really went
to the John Rehm graduate
school and learned an awful lot.
He was brilliant.
John Rehm was thrilled with
every step of Diane's career.
He was just so supportive
of everything she did.
John Rehm
retired at age 71.
and he would wait for
me to come home so we could
go for a long walk
around the neighborhood.
It was in 2004.
on those walks that I began
to hear John Rehm shuffle.
As the years went on.
he became thinner and thinner
and then his hands
began to tremor.
So he knew
something was wrong.
John was suffering
from Parkinson's.
Parkinson's Disease is a
progressive disorder of
the nervous system.
And some people.
like my husband.
can develop complications
that result in death.
John and I began to talk
about his declining health and
the possibility that he would
die much sooner than I would.
Ready when you are.
On my radio program.
just as in my life.
I never shied
away from tough subjects
and neither did John Rehm.
On my mind this week.
medical aid in dying.
Some call it
"death with dignity"
or "physician assisted dying."
It has different names.
I had been aware of
this movement in the U.S. and
was favorably inclined
toward it. generally speaking.
My darling John died
in 2014 and that experience
made this issue very personal.
I realized I still
had a lot to learn.
I decided I should
do what I do best.
investigate this
subject and learn the facts.
You can
decide to stop chemotherapy.
you can decide to have
surgery on your aorta or not.
One of the first
experts I spoke with was
Dr. Lonny Shavelson. a
physician who has been focused
on end of life care
for over three decades.
Probably one of the
driving forces for me to become
a doctor was. was dealing
with the question of suffering.
especially around the
time of Jack Kevorkian
in the early '90s.
I think that people started
really talking about this.
He was a retired
pathologist from Michigan who
specialized in
challenging authority.
Dr. Jack Kevorkian ignited
a national debate in the 1990s
over physician
assisted suicide.
when he helped more than
130 patients kill themselves.
Many
doctors agree with me.
but they're
intimidated into silence.
I am lucky to be in a position
where I don't have to be silent.
People weren't aware
there was a problem until the
extremity of his activities
brought it to light.
how desperate
people were to prevent.
avoid end of life suffering.
It made me
really realize that there was
a bigger picture.
that it was important
for me to look into it.
to understand it better and
to really get into the idea of.
in what was still then a
hidden world of people asking
to die because of
illness and suffering.
When John was dying.
he could no
longer walk on his own.
he could no longer
stand on his own.
he could no
longer feed himself.
The doctor at the nursing
home had said he was within
six months of dying.
because he had lost so much
of his human capacity
except the capacity to think.
He could think very clearly.
And John turned to
the doctor and said.
I am ready to die and
I want you to help me.
And the doctor said.
here in the
state of Maryland.
I have not the
legal authority.
the moral authority or
any other authority
by which to help you die.
The only way
you can
do this is to stop eating.
stop drinking water.
stop taking medication.
And John. for the
first time in a long time.
became enraged.
By the early 1990s.
some people. patients.
physicians and
even some lawmakers.
were beginning to look at
what could be done legislatively
to address end of life
suffering in the United States.
The state of Oregon was at
the center of that movement.
There had been multiple
attempts in the legislatures
of the nation
to introduce a bill.
None of those bills
ever went anywhere.
But we rolled up our
sleeves and crafted a bill
that we believed would satisfy
people's concerns about safety.
eligibility criteria
that were crystal clear.
These are for
mentally capable.
terminally ill adults
who are well informed of all
their end of life options.
Because it's a
medical procedure.
it conforms to the
standards of medical care.
Now there are a
great many people who point to
Oregon's law as the standard by
which all the
others then followed.
Oregon came online
in November of 1997.
Right.
There was not another law
passed until November of 2008.
Oh. wow.
We were having trouble
making process in other states.
until Brittany Maynard
came on the scene in
the waning days of 2014.
Brittany was
an adventurous spirit.
She was a force of nature.
would be a good way to
describe her personality.
Brittany and I. we got
married in September of 2012.
And a few months
after our wedding.
she started having headaches.
They would wake her up
in the middle of the night.
Dan told me that by
the summer they knew something
was seriously wrong.
I was told I
had a grade two astrocytoma
and was told
anywhere from three.
maybe five. up to
ten years to live.
I have to tell you.
when you're 29 years old.
being told you have
that kind of timeline still
feels like you're being told
you're going to die tomorrow.
70 days post-op. I
went in for another MRI.
and was told I
had had a grade change.
They were looking and saying
it looks like grade four.
which is the worst and most
aggressive form of brain cancer.
It's called a glioblastoma.
So that was a major shock to
my system and the system of my
family because it went
from having potentially years
of time to being told
I had like six months.
Brittany told me.
we will continue
to fight this tumor.
but if it gets bad.
we're moving to Oregon.
Oregon's Death
with Dignity Program
was something that
she had come across.
She decided that she
would do what she could with
the time she had remaining
to pave the way so that other
Californians wouldn't
have to do what she did.
and she was
enormously effective.
The freedom of
this patient right is choice.
100 million people
worldwide had seen her.
knew her name and
knew what she stood for.
And we have
our own conversation now
with Barbara Coombs Lee.
president of
Compassion and Choices.
the group dedicated to
expanding end of life options
that's now working
with Brittany Maynard.
And Dr. Ira Byock
is director of the
Institute for Human Caring
of Providence
Health and Services.
a palliative care physician
and author of the book.
"The Best Care Possible".
Well. Barbara Coombs Lee.
let me start with you.
Why do you think the
case of Brittany Maynard
is resonating
with so many people?
What's the key to this for you?
The key is how
Brittany has made dying real.
made the
tragedy of. of decline.
the inhumanities that people
suffer often before their
disease takes their lives.
Brittany is bringing
that reality home to people.
My heart goes
out to Brittany Maynard.
It's a heart wrenching story.
But I want to assure the.
our people watching that
she could get excellent
whole person care
and be assured of
dying gently in her bed.
surrounded by her family.
Giving doctors now authority to
write lethal prescriptions fixes
really nothing. none of the
deficiencies in practice or
medical training. it's really a
socially dangerous thing to do.
Barbara Coombs Lee. a
socially dangerous thing to do?
In other words. it might
work in one individual case.
for Brittany Maynard.
but expanded.
it doesn't make sense
is the argument.
It makes sense for a lot of
people and I think that I agree
with Dr. Byock and
he knows that I do.
Hospice and palliative
care is the gold standard.
It's wonderful.
But it's not a miracle.
And it cannot prevent the kind
of relentless. dehumanizing.
horrific decline
that Brittany faces.
Brittany Maynard was
able to do that and she's in
many ways. a role model.
She's a...
Moving from
California to Oregon?
To Oregon.
It means that you have to
have the wherewithal to uproot
yourself and your
family. your caregivers.
So that takes it out of
the option for many people.
There are people who
feel so strongly. as John did.
that control is what they want
as to when it ends. how it ends.
But sadly. John was too
ill to travel to Oregon.
as Brittany Maynard had done.
I came in with a
photograph album.
I sat on his bed and we looked
at the photographs together.
And he said. Diane. I
have not had any food.
I have not had any medication.
I have not had any water.
I have begun the journey.
He had a smile on his face.
And I believe it was because
he had taken his life back into
his own hands.
Everyone dies
at some point in time.
But what is the enemy
is terminal suffering.
None of us want people who are
about to die to suffer and we go
about different ways in
trying to take care of that.
Language we use at end of life
is so important that we...
Dr. Grube speaks to
medical students around the
country about medical
ethics and end of life care.
Those weeks or days
or months sometimes when a.
a person who is
going to die anyway
has intolerable suffering.
I am trying to persuade them
to open their minds to the fact
that this is something I
think that's compassionate.
Most people do not
choose aid in dying because of
lack of pain control.
Everybody thinks well.
gosh. it's they're having.
oh the suffering is pain.
Their suffering
may be anhedonia.
lack of joy or lack of
pleasure. loss of autonomy.
loss of dignity.
We see the
world differently.
You know. I believe that the
solution to suffering is to help
the sufferer. to be
with the sufferer.
to be willing to suffer
with the patient.
That's what I dedicated my life
to over these last 40 years
as a doctor.
We have to do a better
job of allowing people to
die with dignity. naturally
at the end of their life.
This is something that's
been much discussed at our
national meetings for
geriatrics and for hospice
and palliative medicine.
So. it wasn't a new
issue for any of us.
There's a lot of
genuine disagreement.
there's respect on both sides.
but some people don't feel it's
an appropriate thing
for a doctor to do.
I wonder about the
Hippocratic Oath. to do no harm.
How does that work
into your thinking?
Do no harm.
What is harm and who
gets to define harm?
The harm is
defined by the patient and
not by the doctor.
And the suffering
is defined by the patient.
Yeah.
Bodie and I. he
loves to come with me.
He loves to...
Roger was diagnosed
with incurable stage 4
prostate cancer.
He has since retired
from practicing medicine.
but he and his dog Bodie
walk seven miles every day.
no matter the weather.
I always would tell
my patients that just because
you've got a terminal
condition doesn't mean that
you're dead yet.
That you should go on.
you should continue
living your life.
you should seek the beauty
that's in it and the enjoyment
that you can.
John Rehm could have had
such a peaceful death with his
family around him. with
all of us saying goodbye.
Basically for two weeks.
I listened every day.
sometimes twice a day. to my mom
get updates from my grandmother
about how his condition
was like slowly declining.
It was just an
excruciating time for
all of them.
And especially for Diane. to
have to sit and just watch this
over such a long period.
On the ninth day.
I stayed overnight.
sleeping on two chairs. or
trying to sleep on two chairs.
watching this man suffer.
And the next day. my
dear John was gone.
I spoke with
Lori Wallace-Pushinaitis
and her doctor.
Lori followed the passage of
the California law closely.
I
have had cancer for a little
over seven years.
I have known it's metastatic
for a little over four years.
and if it's metastatic.
there is no cure.
I'm going to die of
breast cancer. right.
So the minute I found out that
there was legislation that was
being considered that
we would vote on.
I started telling my
oncologist immediately. okay.
in today's notes. I want you
to put that I want this option.
And she's like. oh. but we
don't. it's not even passed yet.
I'm like I don't care.
I want there to be as long a
history in my medical records
as possible.
We met
specifically around the issue
of. of her interest
in the option.
Right.
Not with a plan.
but just the reassurance
that if it were there.
that that would be
comforting to her.
And I
can't. I can't choose when.
because if I would choose
when. it would be when I'm 90.
but that's not an option. right.
Lori. if you
had the medication.
do you think you'd use it?
I don't know.
I mean I can't. I don't
know how it's going to look
when I'm dying.
So. you know. I would love
to fall asleep and then die
in my sleep.
That'd be great.
I'd love to do that.
But. if it gets to the point
where I have no quality of life
and I cannot have
my pain maintained.
I'm going to want to do
something about that.
not only for me. but
also for my children.
I have a 12-year old.
He does not need to see
his mother in misery.
I understand.
And I will
do whatever I can to make sure
that it is my choice and not
someone making a choice for me.
There's a strong belief
that good palliative medicine
can almost always relieve
suffering adequately.
Yet there are limits.
And I think that everybody has
to acknowledge that anything in
medicine has a time
when it doesn't work.
In my experience.
there's a subgroup of people
for which nothing that we have
treats. at the end of life.
treats their suffering. nothing.
25% of people who
die with chronic illness.
die with uncontrolled pain.
And in the
palliative world.
we have a lot of experience with
physicians being very reluctant
to adequately treat pain
because they worry about
hastening death.
But this is a tension
that many physicians work with
all the time.
that they're actually
afraid to adequately treat
cancer pain or
other kinds of pain.
so doctors have struggled
with this a lot.
The more I learned
about medical aid in dying.
the more I came to appreciate
how complex an issue it is.
But for some patients. there
can be barriers to care based on
race or ethnicity.
poverty. and other factors.
So. Mrs. C. we're going
to up and see her right after.
To understand this better.
I visited Highland Hospital
where I met Dr. Jessica Zitter.
an expert in palliative care.
What's something
interesting to me and very
alarming as somebody who
takes care of patients.
a lot of African
American patients.
a lot of patients of
color. people. you know.
who don't speak English. is
that there are many. many.
many options that
are not available.
They don't tend to see or hear
about hospice and palliative
care as much as white patients
do. or to access or to use it.
It's a real problem.
Isn't that interesting?
- Yeah.
Access to medical
care is unevenly distributed in
all aspects
throughout our state.
Throughout
the country. indeed.
Rich. throughout
the county. rich people.
poor people. insured
people. non-insured people.
black people. white people.
Latino people. Asian people.
there is no even distribution of
access and there is the unequal
access to aid in dying just
like we see unequal access to
everything else.
It's more like
ache than pain right now.
Good.
The pain
is like. you know.
Softened a little bit.
So when do you reach that point
when you say to the patient.
maybe there's nothing
more we should do?
When do you do that. and how do
you communicate that to them?
Well.
first. first of all.
I would say those words are
not the words that I would use.
which is there's nothing more.
There's always something
more we can do.
there's always something
more we can do. right.
But...
Maybe we can't
cure the disease.
Maybe our treatments can't stop
this disease from progressing.
But there's lots of other
successes we can have.
That's right.
I'm so sorry.
- Yeah. that's sore.
I'm sorry. Okay.
You know what I'm going to do?
I'm going to go call the team.
We're going to go find
out what's going on.
Okay.
There are definitely
families I've encountered that
feel like saying that we're
not going to intubate your
loved one. saying that I
don't think it's a good idea.
they perceive as...
An abandonment?
As sort of harmful or
an abandonment. right.
Hello.
How are you today?
How are you feeling?
One of the
things in. you know.
that's a factor in my practice
is I'm so afraid to think that
someone would think that I was
depriving them of something.
on a racial basis or because
they were less educated.
That's a terrifying
thought for me.
So you can imagine the impulse
to that would be to say well.
let's just do everything. let's
just keep going. we'll trach.
we'll peg. we'll do everything.
And I think that what I've
learned from the palliative care
movement is to stop and to. to.
to try and tolerate the feeling
of discomfort in myself. the
feeling of discomfort in the
loved one or the patient and
stay in the conversation.
Oh. gracious Lord. we pause
for just a moment from a place
of thanksgiving and gratitude.
just knowing that you are right
here in the presence
with each of...
I love Washington. DC.
It's been my home
all of my life.
and I've never wanted
to live anywhere else.
Over the decades. I've seen
tremendous changes happen here.
Finally. after a long battle.
the District of Columbia has
approved the right to
medical aid in dying.
Tell me a little about
how difficult it was to get
this law passed.
Well. it was not easy.
People need time to adapt to
changing social circumstances.
especially big issues like this.
Diane. the reason I
opposed the law was the deep
history of malfeasance when it
comes to the United States of
America and the medical
establishment's commitment to
caring equally for bodies
that are not white.
I understand the law. I support
what the law makes available.
but I do not trust the
government and establishment
to be fair.
Put your hands
together. everybody. welcome!
Would you reach your neighbors
this morning in a spirit
of love. peace and joy?
There was a good deal
of concern. skepticism.
perhaps even suspicion on the
part of African Americans about
some of these medical things
because in the past. we've had.
we have a terrible history
of taking advantage
of African Americans.
Of course.
I got more
opposition from.
from religion than I did from
African American communities.
The Catholics were the ones
that are the most opposed.
in my opinion and were
during this debate.
And I was raised Catholic. so
I kind of knew their arguments
before they came in.
But it was important to listen.
This is a choice.
No one has to participate.
No doctor. no pharmacy.
no provider. no person.
No one.
If somebody is a person of faith
and they feel that their faith
prevents them from doing this.
they're completely entitled to
not act on it.
Or if there's a hospital that's
religiously affiliated and they
feel that their hospital should
participate in this whatsoever.
that's their choice.
While many religions
disagree with these laws.
the Catholic Church is
the most outspoken and
best funded opponent.
Please tell us what the Roman
Catholic's Church's position is
on medical aid in dying.
We have a
creator who creates life.
but part of that created order
is there is a natural way that
we die. and return
to our creator.
We shouldn't take
control over that.
but to let it unfold as
nature would have it.
I know you are a
devout Roman Catholic.
Striving to be.
How much does your
religious belief
motivate your thinking?
It's in sync
with my thinking.
I say all human life
is inherently valuable.
There's a million doctors
in the country. Diane.
And they all don't have the same
sense of reverence for life in
all the stages. the beauty.
So in the
Catholic tradition.
we would say that as your
quality of life diminishes.
your obligation to pursue
and maintain life diminishes
as well.
When we're just
maintaining life.
that is not living
the fullness of life.
so we're allowed to say no to
medical interventions that would
prolong that life.
But what about
medical aid in dying?
Right.
Since death is a part of life.
we would say it's one thing to
say. you know. my quality
of life is diminishing.
I don't want to
pursue this. that.
It's another thing to step in
and to take over the process.
If I had a magic wand
that would ensure that no person
at all. no matter who they are.
would be discriminated against.
and that they would be treated
fairly and honorably and if this
was that person's decision.
then I would support it.
Maryland is
just one of the
many states that have
considered medical aid in dying
over the past several years.
The opponents of the
bill that contacted me over the
course of the last
couple of years have.
have largely focused
on religious arguments.
moral arguments.
It's always been an issue
that I've struggled with. and.
you know. it's been in the
legislature for a number of
years now. and I was
originally opposed.
And I was worried that it
would normalize suicide.
I was worried that it was.
it was a first step on a.
a slippery slope.
Do you consider
medical aid in dying suicide?
No.
The person is on the
threshold of dying.
We're just choosing how. in that
little window that they have
left. how they choose to die.
People who are going
to suicide have the choice to
live and choose
to end their life.
People who are doing
aid in dying don't have the
choice to live.
Tell me. if you can.
what happened to
change your thinking.
It changed with
the death of my mother.
She contracted esophageal
cancer in 2014.
You know. the doctors
did their best to try to
make her comfortable.
She was obviously in
pretty extreme pain.
even with all the palliative
care she was getting.
A few days before she died.
she went into the kitchen and
got the bottle of liquid
morphine that she'd been
prescribed for
the pain and tried to drink it.
tried to commit suicide.
Thinking about my mother and
what she went through and I
began to question whether I had
the right as an elected official
or even as her next of kin to
make that decision for her.
Delegate Luedtke's story
reminded me of something another
legislator told me. that each
of us is just one bad death away
from supporting these laws.
Bill Roberts and I have been
friends since high school when
we were voted "cutest couple"
in the graduating class.
But in 2018. he was diagnosed
with stage 4 prostate cancer and
congestive heart failure.
As happened with
John Rehm and myself.
Irene and Bill had to
face their own mortality.
And we have
discussed end of life because
friends have died.
You know. and sometimes terrible
things have happened to people
we've loved so much and it was.
it was happening to us.
You know. when you
get to be in your 80s.
you know no one gets out alive.
I guess there's a bet
going with the doctors at the
hospital as to what'll
get me first. the.
the heart failure or the cancer.
You live in Colorado
where medical aid in dying
is permitted.
I feel very lucky
in. in living in Colorado and
having this option.
It will be a gentle easing
into whatever comes next.
I. I. I have no great
anticipation for the next life.
but I'll tell you what. I'll.
I'll find out and I'll try to
let you know.
That conversation
was bittersweet for me.
I knew that my old
friend would die soon.
but I took comfort in knowing
that he. unlike my husband.
would have the option
of medical aid in dying.
I want to say thank you
to everyone who is here.
I want to say to the proponents.
the people who are
here in favor of the bill.
thank you so much
for all your efforts and I'm so
grateful to have you here.
And I want to say
to the opponents.
thank you for taking
your time to be here...
And so. when the
Maryland legislature took up
the matter again.
We're going to
call House Bill 3.
And I was
asked to testify.
both Bill Roberts and
John Rehm were very much
on my mind.
The Maryland
legislation that is before
you today has been
modeled after the Oregon
Death with Dignity Act.
And it's been implemented in
eight other jurisdictions for a
combined 40 years of experience.
And I hope that this time
around that we can bring this
compassionate and
much needed option to the
residents of Maryland.
Good afternoon.
I'm Diane Rehm.
The legislation you are
considering might have permitted
John Rehm to have the measure
of autonomy that he wanted over
his own death.
By this time. what I had heard
from patients. family members.
physicians and others
had taught me a lot.
This end of life option provokes
strong feelings in people.
as it should.
and as the concerns of the
Maryland lawmakers demonstrated.
Delegate Watson.
Thank you. Mr. Chair.
and thank you all
for coming out.
I really appreciate it.
This has answered
a lot of questions.
but I still have one
or two remaining.
We had had a very
emotionally wrought debate on
the bill when it came
to the House floor.
It was a very difficult
conversation to have.
My concern is based
around the financial capability
and dwindling resources as we
age. of certain demographics.
The concern
from my constituents is like
a lot of them.
they have a concern about fear.
economic situation.
vulnerable community.
I mean what if.
at the end of the day.
a health insurance company looks
at it strictly as any business
to maximize revenue. and they
say instead of paying for
someone to take chemo over an
extended period of time when
they're going to
pass away anyway.
let's save money and give
them this one option.
The. the folks that
maybe don't have the best
insurance to get
the best treatment.
are going to be kind
of if they're in pain.
this may be their only option?
And what the
fact is in the health care
insurance industry.
a dead person is the most
cost effective person of all.
What's the difference
between this medical aid in
dying medication
and the morphine?
What happens if the
medication isn't administered
properly or if it
doesn't work as intended?
Can you
explain. very briefly.
what a physician looks to to
determine mental capacity?
How do you respond
to folks who feel very strongly
that aid in dying would increase
the risk of death for truly
vulnerable people?
That is those who are
disabled in some way.
Amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. for example. ALS...
These laws
that we've passed.
the law here and in
other jurisdictions.
requires that somebody
meet certain criteria.
That means that people who are
not able to self-administer
cannot avail
themselves of this law.
And there was an
interesting divide in the
disabled community.
There were those who were
worried that this would be a
step toward euthanasia and
people who were disabled would.
you know. be at risk.
you know. in the future.
But there are others in the
disabled community who were
disappointed in the legislation
because they said what if we
have a disability that prevents
us from self-administering.
And I said. you know. it's not a
flaw in the legislation so much
it is an understanding of
what we could accomplish
at this time.
So you have to keep in
mind you've got this legislation
and its protections. but you
also have an entire practice of
medicine where doctors
are licensed and education
and certification.
Those practices and rules
also govern this practice.
I think that we make
a lot of rash and bad decisions
sometimes when we're
in pain. because all...
The legislators expressed
very understandable concerns.
But in states where laws
have been implemented.
evidence shows the protections
written into them have worked.
Knowing that lets me focus on
what is so important to me.
individual autonomy.
My philosophy in this matter
is to respect that singularly
personal moment for each of us.
If you believe that only
God should be the decider.
I support you 100%.
If you wish to have
every single option that
medical science can provide.
I support you 100%.
And if you believe. as I do.
that you want the
right to end your suffering
at a time you choose.
I support you 100%.
The bill went over to
the Senate and I think I lot of
the senators were struggling
with the issue in the same way
that a lot of them
members of the House were.
It did end up tying. one vote
short of what it needed to pass.
I was disappointed
when the bill failed.
So was I.
But I expect the
bill will come up again.
and I hope it will
pass next time.
Washington. D.C.'s Death with
Dignity Law went into effect in
June of 2017. but no terminally
ill patient actually used the
law for over a year.
One of the first patients to
do so was journalist and artist
Mary Klein.
Stella Dawson was Mary's wife
and life partner for more than
37 years.
Mary was complaining of
stomach pains and of digestive
problems. she said Stella.
I'm really. really tired.
I came back from work and
Mary took my hand and took me
into the living room
and we sat down.
and she said. "Stella.
I think I have cancer."
And so we spent the weekend
researching doctors and got an
appointment and sure enough.
it was advanced ovarian cancer.
She did five series of
chemo because she was.
she wanted to live and
she wanted that opportunity
to enjoy her life.
So she did all that she could
for as long as she could.
Nothing was working.
Mary's diagnosis came
before medical aid in dying was
legal in Washington. D.C.
But as her disease progressed.
she learned the City Council
would be voting on a bill.
Mary said to me.
"Stella. there's a
chance that we can get
medical aid in dying
here in the District."
so we both hit the telephones.
started writing letters.
And Mary Cheh was the
first person who responded.
She was very. very brave.
She was quite ill too.
I know.
And she would come
and she would testify.
She was not even sure
that the law would be in place
before she passed away.
And so I remember her saying.
"This is what I'm trying to do
with my end of life is give
somebody in the future the
freedom to make this decision
and not have to go through what
I've gone through."
And let me just say.
these are difficult
conversations to have
with your doctor.
Mary spoke out at a
public meeting saying.
"I can't find a doctor
who is willing to
participate with me."
So how difficult was
it to find that doctor?
It was very stressful.
Mary Klein was
referred to you?
She told me
as soon as we met
that she was looking for
a physician to help her.
And she said.
"I've never done this.
If you're willing to on
this journey with me.
I'm willing to go
on it with you."
Wow.
Mary saw this
as part of a continuum of care
and she was enrolled in hospice
and was very pleased with the
hospice care she got.
Good.
But she was
waiting as long as she could
with the medications
that we had that she could
manage and they
weren't working anymore.
They weren't working.
At the very end. I said
you know I could give you enough
medicine so that you just would
sleep for the rest of the time
you have. and she said
I don't want that.
She did not want to
be in a coma or a semi coma
at the end of her life.
She wanted to be present.
she wanted to be with
me and the dogs.
She wanted to be
able to say goodbye.
Of course.
And it was that
night she said to me.
Stella it's time.
You don't know it's going
to be the end. do you?
No.
You don't.
You don't. you don't.
You know. even though.
even though she said something
like that. I still thought
she had several weeks.
I visited her four days
before she died and then again
on the day that she died.
Oh. I'm so glad.
And Mary was dying.
that last time I saw her.
I. she died from ovarian cancer.
She did not die from the
potion that she drank.
that just affected
the time she died.
But she was already dying.
She just laid back and
went into a very deep sleep.
And you were
right there with her.
It was about
two and a half hours before
she passed away.
And she died in my arms.
That's what she wanted.
That's exactly. it's what she
fought so very. very hard for.
It's a peaceful death.
And it's a loving death.
I think that's all I can say.
In 2020. humanity
began a long struggle with the
COVID-19 pandemic.
tens of millions
became infected and many.
many deaths were
reported each day.
In this country. I think this
has led more of us to recognize
the importance of making our end
of life wishes known to those
close to us.
Then would you be good
enough to take the phone
out of your
pocket and video this?
Okay.
Because I would very much
like your mother. your father.
uncle Dave. Aunt Nancy.
everybody to know exactly how I
feel about what I'd
like at the end of life.
Do you want
me to record it?
Please.
To my family. my physician
and any hospital...
I believe that the more we learn
to talk openly about death.
the better.
It's been such a taboo subject
for many of us for too long.
but if we can discuss what
we want with our friends.
our doctors. our families. if we
can make our own wishes known to
those who care about us.
everyone will be more prepared.
and the end of life will be
less stressful and could be more
joyous for us all.
As for me. in my early 80s.
I'm living life to the fullest.
I'm still working.
I've remarried. I travel.
I have a new puppy.
Life is wonderful.
But. I have also prepared
for what will eventually come
for all of us.
and I'll be ready
when my time comes.